---
layout: paper
paper-type: firstyearreport
institution: University of Edinburgh
title: CCG-based Models for Statistical Machine Translation
doc-url: papers/first_year_report.pdf
abstract: >
  The arguably best performing statistical machine translation systems are based
  on context-free formalisms or weakly equivalent ones. These models usually use
  a syn- chronous version of a context-free grammar (SCFG) which we argue is too
  rigid for the highly ambiguous task of human language translation. This is
  exacerbated by the fact that the imperfect methods available for aligning
  parallel texts make extracting an effi- cient grammar very hard. As a result,
  the context-free grammars extracted are usually very large in size after
  having already been restricted through a variety of constraints.
  <br><br> 

  We propose to use Combinatorial Categorial Grammar (CCG) for machine trans-
  lation models. CCG is a lexicalized, mildly-context-sensitive formalism which
  is very well suited to capture long-distance dependencies that are not
  addressed very well by most current models. We believe that CCG is very well
  suited for the task of machine translation due to its ability to represent
  non-constituents in a syntactic way which fre- quently occur in parallel texts
  as well as its high derivational flexibility. This allows us to use some of
  the advantages of non-syntactic phrase-based approaches within a syntactic
  framework such as a relatively small grammar size compared to context-free-
  based machine translation grammars.
  <br><br>

  A number of models leveraging the advantages of CCG are possible, however, our
  principal goal is to develop a string-to-tree based model which projects CCG
  on the target side of a synchronous grammar. We intend to apply the vast
  progress made in monolingual CCG parsing to machine translation. Additionally,
  we propose to extend CCG to a synchronous grammar (SCCG) as it has been done
  for other related for- malisms such as tree adjoining grammars. We hope that a
  SCCG may provide similar derivational flexibility to monolingual CCG which may
  result in a better model for translational equivalence.
---
